Gutenberg 1.8 was released this week with several notable improvements that will
give plugin developers more flexibility in extending the editor. It introduces 
block templates, which developers can use when registering a new custom post
type. The block templates define a set of pre-configured blocks that will
initialize when a user creates a new post. In the example below, Gutenberg lead
engineer Matias Ventura demonstrates what a block template for a book custom
post type might look like.



This release also improves the design of the tools menu (toggled by the ellipses
at the top of the editor) to have a more lightweight UI that will lend itself
better to displaying items added by extensions in the future. The new design
displays multiple menu items as a radio group where the selected item shows a
checkmark, an approach that Gutenberg designers found to be more intuitive after
some research.



Version 1.8 adds the ability for developers to filter allowed block types by
specifying an array of type names that can be shown in the inserter component.
This capability paves the way for block nesting where developers can define
allowed children types. It also allows custom post types to specify which blocks
are allowed or restricted, which will be useful for keeping CPTs lean as
Gutenberg already has a large number of block types.

The release also improves meta box compatibility with a fallback to the classic
editor if Gutenberg detects that the meta box is unsupported. Plugin authors can
now explicitly declare Gutenberg incompatibility when registering meta boxes,
which will trigger a warning to the end user that explains which meta boxes have
caused the fallback to the classic editor.

In addition to all the improvements for extending Gutenberg, version 1.8 makes
many small design tweaks, including updated color pickers with color indications
and collapsible panels, updated icon and tooltip for table of contents menu, and
a new contrast checker for paragraph color options. It also puts block actions
back on the block level for the default, while still preserving the option to
change it to a fixed toolbar at the top of the screen.

For a full list of all the changes in version 1.8, check out the release post 
and the changelog on WordPress.org.